---
layout: post
permalink: /posts/anvil-and-crucible
title:  "Ansible: The Anvil and the Crucible"
collection: posts
date:   2021-02-01
---

Ansible is a popular, open source, python program that can leverage ssh-keys to preform configuration management tasks on hosts that are registered to its inventory. It is agent-less, and required little in the way of configuration. It is written in Yet Another Markup Language (YAML) and is easily readable to the layperson (readable != self-documenting, IMHO).

One of the first questions I was asked, that I felt like I couldn't find a satisfactory answer for is this:

    "Should this be a role or a playbook"

After several years of thinking about this, I've decided to write down my philosophical maxim of sorts in an attempt to answer this question.


First some basics:

## About Ansible

Ansible is a useful tool for the administrator tasked with maintaining a diverse environment. By standardizing processes and configuration sets across the environment, and with parallel processing effort is saved in deployment and technical debt is reduced as changes that are made to ansible processes and configuration sets are version controlled. Ansible has three separate modes of use: ad-hoc, playbook, role. Each of these modes corresponds to method of change that ansible leverages.

### A Note on Idempotence

[Idempotence][idempotence] is the property of certain operations in mathematics and computer science whereby they can be applied multiple times without changing the result beyond the initial application. A basic example of an idempotent operation is "turn on the lights". The result of asking someone to "turn on the lights" is that the state of the lights will be on, regardless of their state before you asked.



## The Anvil

Forging is the processing of metal by heating it in fire and heating or hammering it into its desired shape. This is analagous to how Ansible can be used to automate processes with the use of playbooks. Playbooks do non-standard things in a standardized way. From creating a user to installing and configuring a one off service. Playbooks and Ad Hoc usage of Ansible give the administrator the power to administer and make changes on the server / group of servers at hand, in parallel.

### Using Ansible Ad-Hoc and Playbooks

Running ansible in Ad-Hoc mode with `ansible` allows you to implement one-off commands / module calls from the command line for any defined group / host in the inventory. In my experience this method is useful for reporting and coordinating changes due to environmental factors: e.g. moving VMs from one HA group to another for maintenance, or patching all of the vunlerable nodes of a given kind. I personally visualize this method of use as "The Anvil". This method is well suited for responses and parallel processing can bring down response times.


Ansible playbooks, a YAML formatted job object that allows for the sequencing of automated events. Playbooks use the same [ansible modules][ansible-mods] used for ad-hoc calls to string actions together. Playbooks contain one or more job objects that span multiple hosts to preform more complex processes. An important note about the Ansible playbook is that it is  _not_ necessarily idempotent i.e. running a playbook multiple times can yield different results.

## The Crucible

A crucible is used in the process of casting metal into a re-usable cast. One of the methods of mass production, raw material is heated and cast into the shape of a form. Ansible can take a server and install a standardized configuration and enforce that configuration going forward, keeping each instance of that server up-to-date with the latest role updates. This is important 

### Ansible Roles

Roles are the method Ansible uses to deploy and enforce configurations (changed back to the standard if something has changed on disk). Because they preform pre-flight checks in order to determine the state of things before issuing changes, Ansible roles are idempotent.
Roles are the odd one out here because of the fact that ansible roles are not run against a machine / group of machines but applied uniformly. Ansible roles can be assigned via host or group var, playbook, or ad hoc call. 

## What all this really means

Ansible is a tool for system administrators that acts as both anvil and crucible; providing both the tools to create one-offs in a standardized way and allowing the administrator to cast a system to a specific role.

[idempotence]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence
[ansible-mods]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.9/modules/modules_by_category.html
~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
~                                           
