---
layout: single
permalink: /posts/wfhblues
title:  "The WFH Blues"
collection: posts
date:   2021-02-18
---

_By [Drew Foulks](https://linkedin.com/in/andrewfoulks)_


# Working from home got you down?

I don't know about you, but work has me down lately. We've gotten some snow and the girls have had some time off of school and I completely missed it because I didn't (and don't) feel like I can always communicate my needs. Sometimes, what I need is outside help; but oftentimes the root of whatever problem I'm facing is some sort of self-defeating behavior. Some of these I've got pet names for, but I know that there have to be others who fall prey to these things too.

So here we go! a deep dive into my favorite self-defeating behaviors.

## "The Tetris Mindset"

Tetris is one of the most popular video games ever made. Nearly everyone on earth has played this game at some point in their lives. The fact that tetris is as ubiquitous as it is makes this the most easily explained self-defeating behavior. In the game of tetris, the object is to create solid rows out of several geometric arrangements of 4 squares. Once a row is completed it vanishes and you gain 100 points for your effort. The game is simple: play until no more pieces will fit into the screen.

After thinking about this for many years, I've come to realize that what the tetris player is constantly looking at is a monument of their own failure. That pile of squares represents everything you haven't done yet, all of the mistakes you've made and the opportunities you've missed.

_**So why do people still play tetris?**_

My thought on this is that because tetris is something you can put down and press pause; compare high scores with your friends; get frustrated, rage quit, then start again fresh later.

Very rarely does life afford you the opportunity to do _any_ of the things I just mentioned. But that doesn't mean we can't try to implement some room to do these things (or an equivalent of it) in life. My favorite cure for the Tetris Mindset is to stop working for a bit and enjoy the things that your work allows you to do.

## "The Urkel Paradigm"

Reacting to problems at work can be harrowing at times. When your work can be destructive, every time an alert goes off panic can set in. What I've come to call "The Urkel paradigm" assumes that the blame is on you before you even know what really happened.

This thought process, left unchecked, metamorphoses into an attitude where you see yourself as the most likely point of failure in everything you do. The weakest link so to speak.

_**What do I do about this?**_

to be perfectly honest with you my friend, I have no idea. It's something that I struggle with every day. Low self-esteem _really_ sucks, but there are ways to fight it! I use a routine as well as some things I've learned about myself over the years to help me not be discouraged when I perceive myself to be the problem.

* I shower and get dressed every day (even on weekends... just later...)
* I make it a point to eat meals (even if it's more like a snack than a lunch, it's better than nothing)
* Exercise

I know right, that sounds an awful lot like the things you do to fight depression, and you're right. They do. That's because _this_ kind of thinking can exacerbate any stress into a full blown mood.


And last but not least
 
## "The Yardstick problem"

The yardstick problem is a problem of comparitive effort. It is probably _the_ most commonly referenced problem since social media became a thing. In a nutshell, The problem is comparing yourself against people that aren't necessarily your peers. If you're feeling down because you can't handle the problem as quickly as the guy who wrote the system, you've set yourself up for failure friend!

That guy, is way better than you _at that_, that doesn't mean they're better than you. I don't know if anyone else feels this way but whenever I'm bad at something I feel bad, and I feel worse by comparison when other people are good at it.

If you wouldn't challenge Gary Kasparov to a chess match _right now_, stop trying to out-chess to Gary Kasparov.

_**What helps me**_

I like to take breaks and go do things I'm good at. THEN I GET TO BE THE UNREASONABLE YARDSTICK!!!

but in all seriousness: there's probably someone, somewhere, who admires something you do.


I know that I suffer from these harmless sounding afflictions but the struggle is real y'all. any one of these can cause major issues in anxiety, depression, and even cause executive functional issues.
